File No.RT-25036/10/2021-RS

F. No. RT-25036/10/2021-RS (195930)
Government of India
Ministry of Roads Transport and Highways
(Road Safety Cell)
New Delhi the

224 December, 2021

To,
Principal Secretary/Secretary/Commissioner (Transport)
Department of Transport
All States/UTs
Sub.: Scheme/Guidelines for proposals for setting up of Institute of Driving Training &
Research (IDTRs), Regional Driving Training Centres (RDTCs) and Driving Training

Centres (DTCs) during 15" Finance Commission Cigcle.
Sir,

I am directed to forward herewith a copy of scheme/Guidelines for setting up of
Institute of Driving Training & Research (IDTRs), Regional Driving Training Centres
(RDTCs) and Driving Training Centres (DTCs) during 15th Finance Commission Cycle.

2:
The scheme/guidelines
www.morth.nic.in.

can

also

be

downloaded

from

the

ministry’s

website

3. It is required to send suitable proposals for setting up of Institute of Driving Training
& Research (IDTRs), Regional Driving Training Centres (RDTCs) and Driving
Training Centres (DTCs) according to the enclosed guidelines to the Ministry of Road
Transport & Highways.

Yours faithfully,
Encl.: As above

(Ram Raj Megna)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India
011-23718560

Copy to: Sr. PPS to Secretary (RT&H)/Sr.PPS to AS(RT&H) for kind information.
Copy also to: Technical Director, NIC, MoRT&H
portal

to upload the scheme of the Ministry’s

Government of India
Mimstry of Road Transport & Highways
GUIDELINES
OF SCHEME FOR SETTING UP
OF
INSTITUTES OF DRIVING TRAINING AND RESEARCH
REGIONAL DRIVER TRAINING

CENTRE

(IDTRs)

(S) - (RDTCs)

DRIVING TRAINING CENTRES-(DTCs)
DURING
15™ FINANCE COMMISSION CYCLE PERIOD
(2021-22 to 2025-26)

Index

Scheme
Tier -I

(IDTRs)

Background
1.1 General Guidelines

Descriptions

1.2 Who Can Send the Proposal

1.3Infrastructure Requirements
1.4Financial Implications
1.5 Management of IDTR
1.6 Responsibilities of Central, State Govt. and Private Partner
Tier -II

(RDTCs)

Tier-HI
(DTCs)

1.7 Annexures-I (A to F)

Page
2-3

1

3-4

4
5-6
6
6-7
8-25

2.1 General Guidelines

26-27

2.3Infrastructure Requirements
2.4Financial Implications
2.5 Recurring expenditure
2.6 Management of RDTC
2-7 Responsibilities of Central, State Govt. and Private Partner

28
28-29
29
30
30-31

2.8 Annexure-II (A to B)

32-39

2.2 Who Can Send the Proposal

3.1 General Guidelines
3.2 Objectives

3.3 Eligibility
3.4 Infrastructure Requirements
3.5 Financial assistance
3.6 Procedure seeking assistance
3.7 Timeline for submission of proposals

3.8 Operations and management of the Centre
3.9 Infrastructure Requirements
3.10 Allied activities
3.11 Annexure IITA : form for DTC application
3.12 Annexure HIB- form for authorization from State

27

40-41

41

Al
41-42
42
42-43
43

43
43-44
44
45-46
47

BACKGROUND
1.

Large numbers of road accidents are taking place on Indian roads every year
resulting in the death of more than one lakh forty thousand persons. The causative
analysis of various road accidents studies carried out in the past infers that majority
of road accidents occur due to drivers fault. The report of year 2019 indicates that
82% of all road accidents are due to the fault of the driver. Despite having adequate
provisions in C. M. V. Rules which directly as well as indirectly helps in ensuring
good driving skills and knowledge of rules of road regulation among drivers, there
is an urgent need to impart driving training, both theoretical and practical to the
existing and aspiring drivers. Need has also been felt for setting standards and
monitoring driving training and issue of Driving Licence based on an objective
scientific process of testing skills. Therefore, as per provisions under the Motor
Vehicles (Amendment)
Motor Vehicles Rules,

Act, 2019, Government of India has modified the Central
1989 vide Notification dated 7 June, 2021 to make the

Centre(s)-(DTCs)

proposed

driving training scientific and systematic, vest the accredited Driving Training
Center with certain functions like testing of aspirants for issue of driving licence
and to make accredited driving Training Center a commercially viable business
proposition.
The Government of India intends to set up more model Institutes of Driving
Training and Research (IDTR) in the country during the 15" Finance Commission
Cycle period. It has been decided to set up IDTR in 3-tier system. The model IDTR
in tier-I shall be the model driver training institute having adequate land (10-15
acres) and shall include complete infrastructure required for a modern IDTR. In tierII, Regional Driver Training Centre(s)- (RDTCs) are proposed to be developed
across States (excluding the district in the State where IDTR is proposed or
developed) preferably on land measuring minimum about 3 acres with basic support
infrastructure including automated testing tracks.
In tier-III, Driving Training
are

to

be

developed

at

district

level

across

States

(excluding the district in the State where IDTR or RDTC is proposed or developed)
on land measuring minimum about 2 acres with basic support infrastructure.

The RDTC proposal(s) shall require sanction of respective State Government. The
tier two institutes are expected to be set up and operated by the private sector on a
PPP mode. During the 15" Finance Commission Cycle period, financial support
will be provided for setting up of such institutes on a pilot basis.
The centres to be set up under this scheme shall comply the provisions under the
Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989.

1.

SCHEME FOR TIER-I (IDTR)

1.1 General Guidelines

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)
(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)
(xi)

The ministry of Road Transport & Highways intends to_set_up IDTRs in
States/UTs on the basis of one IDTR per 5.00 crore projected population.
The proposal should contain categorical recommendation of the State
Government.
Land for the Institute shall be provided free from all encumbrances and the
title
of the
land
will
vest
in the
State
Government/
Central
Government/Society. In case of lease holding, same shall be on a lease of at
least 33 years. The Cost of land development and Compound Wall for
IDTR/RDTC will be borne by the State Government or the Private Developer.
Proposals received from State Governments/ Private Developers having
encroachment and encumbrance free land in their possession should be given
priority in the setting up of new Institutes of Driving Training and Research
(IDTR).
The proposed location for setting up of IDTR should not be more than 8-10
kms from main city/municipal limits.
The proposal should envisage self-sufficiency in meeting the recurring
expenditure as this shall not be provided by the Central Government.
However, the initial grant may include a component for the consumable for the
first year only.
The grant of the Central Government shall be one time grant for the capital
component of the proposal and the estimates on this account should be based
on latest approved CPWD or State PWD Schedule of Rates. However, actual
procurement should be made by following tender procedure to obtain most
competitive price and quality products. The capital component of the proposal
may include modern equipments such as innovative driving test system
(IDTS) using Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags or video recording,
simulators, computers and other modern aids. Under this head, provision for
hostel facilities including fitting and furnishing can also be considered.
The proposal should invariably contain a project appraisal report/feasibility
report with reference to demand, vicinity of city, layout etc. by an independent
reputed agency and comments of State Government, if any.
Initially, the proposals shall be considered for the locations in/adjacent to the
State Capital/Major towns. States already covered in the erstwhile Scheme will
be will be given reduced priority during the 15" Finance Commission Cycle
period except for setting up of RDTC, equipment/simulators and up-gradation
based on utilization of the existing capacity.
A Standing Committee comprising officers from Ministry of Road Transport
& Highways, CIRT Pune and experts from the field will scrutinize
/recommend the setting up of IDTR and also monitor their progress of work.
The project should be completed within 24 months from the date of release of
1* installment and submission of closure report with final Utilisation
Certificate within six months of completion failing which a penalty as suitable
may be imposed on the executing agencies, which may include debarring the
executing agency for future projects.

(xii)
(xiii)
(xiv)

(xv)

(xii)

(xiii)
(xiv)

(xv)
(xvl)

The Institutes shall submit half yearly performance report.
The Skill Development training under IDTR may be imparted in accordance
with National Policy on Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, 2015.
It shall be obligatory on the part of the Institute set up from the funds of
Central Government to implement the schemes run by Central Government on
drivers training on the terms and conditions set out by the Central
Government.
The staff employed at the IDTR shall mandatorily have to undergo training for
trainers and will be evaluated for suitability at one of the existing IDTRs
designated by the Ministry.
The Central Government/State Governments will make changes in the motor
vehicle rules to mandate driving training for certain categories of drivers, for
renewal of LMV/ 2 wheeler / heavy motor vehicle driving licence and vest the
institutes with certain functions like testing of aspirants for issue of driving
licence.
The training courses would be compliant with the National Skill
Qualification Framework (NSQF).

Annual audit of the Institutes by the State to verify the utilisation shall be
mandatory.
The proposal for setting up of IDTR should invariably contain provisions of
Automated driving test tracks.
CIRT, Pune will play roll of monitoring agency under the scheme to provide
Technical and handholding support for IDTR and RDTC projects under the
Scheme. However, States/UTs shall have option to choice services of any IIT
or NIT, state Government Engineering College or any competent Technical
agency for Technical and handholding support for IDTR and or RDTC
projects under the scheme in place of CIRT, Pune.

1.2 Who Can Send the Proposal?
1)

State Government, and/or

iit) Any other agencies such as State Transport Undertakings, Transport
Companies/
Associations,
NGOs,
Private
Party/Automobile
Associations/Vehicle Manufacturers’ Association/Autonomous Body/Private
Vehicle
Manufacturers
authorized
and
recommended
by
the State
Governments, in collaboration with the Government.

iii)
However, the Central Government shall give preference to those
States/UTs, which make provisions in the motor vehicle rules to mandate
driving training for certain categories and also vest in the IDTR the power to
licence, monitor, categorize and audit the other driving training schools in the
state. In order to facilitate the setting up of IDTRs in a time bound manner, the
Central Government shall give preference to those States / UTs whose nodal
agency, as approved by the respective State Government submits proposal for
setting up IDTR in joint venture with above mentioned categories.
1.2.1
1)

Criteria of the Eligibility
Government for Collaboration

for

Agencies

other

Must be registered with the appropriate legal authority.

3

than

State

it)

Must have a clean record since inception.

iil)

Must have an annual financial turnover of the NGO
= 1.00 Crore.

iv)

Should have experience of minimum of 3 years in the field of Road
Safety.

should be above

Note: NGOs and private firm are required to hypothecate the land/(to be
built up infrastructure) in the name of the Ministry of Road Transport &
Highways, Transport Bhawan, 1 Parliament Street New Delhi,
till the
utilization of funds released to them and submission of Utilization Certificate
duly certified by CA in this respect.
1.3

Infrastructure Requirements

A minimum of 10-15 acres of land would be required to set up an IDTR with
various infrastructure facilities such as class rooms with teaching aids like
T.V. and DVD, computers and Multimedia Projector for handling theory
classes on Traffic Rules and Regulations, Driving Procedures, Vehicle
Mechanism, Public Relations and First Aid. latest and future technologies for
the purpose of teaching such as online tutoring, extensive interactive
simulation, interactive screen and touch terminals etc. shall be adopted as
teaching
aids.
To display cut section models of various working systems of an automobile,
including failed components as well as static models on driving procedures, a
separate driving lab is also required.
Testing equipments to test physical ability of drivers including eye vision,
Driving Simulator, and a comprehensive driving range with various types of
manoeuvres to impart off-road driving practice in basic driving procedures and
driving
practice
in
skill
development,
including
installation
of
Sensor/RFID/Video Analytics based IDTS are required. An indicative layout
of Driving Range and various facilities provided in the Driving Range for skill
development practice is placed at Annexure — I (E). However the actual
layout will depend on topography of the land. All the dimensions should
comply with Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 and IRC specifications.
The other infrastructure such as workshop shed for maintenance and repair of
training vehicles, canteen and Hostel facilities are also to be provided in the
Institute itself. The details of the infrastructure requirement are given in the

Annexure-I (FE).

1.4

Financial Implications
Capital investment

The Central Government may provide 100% of the capital investment subject
to maximum of & 17.25 Crore (all inclusive) as per following tentative break
up:
(i)

Civil Construction:

= 14 Crore

z

0.75

(iti)

Vehicle and Simulator:

z

2.50

(ii)

Office and Workshop equipment:
Crore
Crore

If size of the project is more than 2 17.25 Crore (all inclusive), the excess
amount will be borne either by the State Government or Private Developer.
The land should be provided by the State Government free of cost or at a
subsidized price, if it is not possible to provide it free of cost.
Funds shall be released as per the progress report, UC and recommendation of
the monitoring
agency,
engaged
for appraising
the progress
and
recommendation for next installment based on the following milestones:SL | Milestone
No.

1.

Amount to
be released

| Mobilization advance: On receipt of MoU with the ppp | 20% of the
partner, local clearances for the project, formation of | project cost
society,
hypothecation
of
land
(If
applicable),
arrangement of funds to the society for land development
and compound wall by the State/private partner

2. | After land development, construction of the compound | 30% of the
wall, 30% construction of Training Centre, Test track and | project cost
other amenities
3. | After 75% construction of Training Centre, test track and | 35% of the
other amenities
project cost
4. | After recommendation of the closure of the project by the | 15% of the
monitoring agency :
project cost
Total
100%
In addition, the monitoring agency will be paid = 10 lakh for technical and
handholding support and monitoring of the project. It will also be released in
instalments at the time of release of project cost in similar instalments.
Further, in respect of IDTR projects sanctioned on the land owned by the
private partner, the funds under the scheme will be transferred by the State
Government to an account in the name of the society. The funds from this
account will be utilised for the project only with joint signature of two
members of the society out of which one will be member representative of the
private partner and one member representative of the State Government.
5

Expenditure

Advance

Transfer

(EAT)

module

expenditure on the project under the scheme.
1.5

of PFMS

shall be used

for

Management of IDTR

For overseeing the construction and operation of the IDTR, a society shall be
formed. The society will comprise of the representatives of Ministry of Road
Transport, Govt. of India, State Government and Private partners.
1.6
Responsibilities
Responsibilities

of

Central,

State

Govt.

and

Private

The parties involved in the establishment and management of IDTR
Central

Government,

State

Government

and

Private

responsibilities of the individual parties are given below:-

Partner

Partner.

are the
The

1.6.1 Central Government

e

Fund the setting up of IDTR subject to maximum

e

Ifrequired, necessary amendments will be incorporated in CMVR
to make project viable.
A mechanism for grievance redressal shall also be institutionalized
under the chairpersonship of Joint Secretary, MoRTH for handling
grievances wherein intervention of MORTH is required.
Encourage OEMs to sponsor vehicles and cut section model
(rejected /testing vehicles) to these institutes
Support in procurements training and testing equipments from the
national/ international manufactures at a subsidized rate.

e
e
e¢

Crore (all inclusive).

up to ® 17.25

1.6.2 State Government

e
e
e
e
e
e

Ensure execution of the IDTR projects by following the norms in
the stipulated time periods.
Ensure effective utilization of the infrastructure being set up in the
IDTR through legislative provisions.
Ensure legislation provisions to ensure that the IDTR projects are
commercially viable by ensuring minimum guaranteed number of
people get trained and certified through the centre.
Arrangement of annual performance audit and inspection of IDTR
on regular intervals.
Identify and allot requisite land of about 10-15 acres for setting up
the institute free of cost.
Recognise the IDTR as an accredited establishment for the
purposes of exemption from driving licence testing requirement at
the time of applying for driving license of the successfully pass
driving licence aspirants at these IDTRs as per provisions under the
CMVRule, 1989.

Necessary amendments will be incorporated in MVR of the state
to make project viable. Government should make it mandatory to
issue all the new licenses and renewal only through the IDTR and
RDTC and also ask all PSU’s and Government organization to
recruit drivers and train them through the system.
All educational institutions should participate for regular programs
on road safety conducted by the institute.
Bear any expenditure in excess of the stipulated grant in
association with the private partner.
1.6.3

Private Partner

Play the lead role in the establishment and management of the
IDTR.
Sponsor the vehicles, training aggregates and teaching aids in the
IDTR.
Assist the Government in relation to various processes related to
setting up and managing operations of training and training centres
professionally,
motor
driving
training,
imparting
technical
assistance and skills in the said profession for maintenance of
vehicles.
Provide support in the form of designing course content,
curriculum,

technical

assistance,

guidance,

vehicles

and

equipments required for training, know-how and services, training
aggregates, training materials including vehicles manuals and
teaching aids for driver training.
Provide employment opportunities to the deserving qualified and
trained drivers at the IDTR through their business processes.
Impart free training to the instructors of the IDTR on a regular
basis regarding the latest vehicle technologies.
To bring in professionalism in the area of driver training.
Design, develop and operate the institute on time line stipulated by
the government.
Bring in new technology and modern tools and process run the
institute as a self-sustainable mode.
Complete Administration and run the institute under the guidelines
of the government.
Submit periodical progressive reports to the government.
Install audit and review mechanism for annual audit & quality
assurance.
Bear any expenditure in excess of the stipulated grant in
association with the State Government.
1.7

More details of a Standard IDTR are given at Annexure-I.
7

Annexure I (A)

DETAILS OF A STANDARD INSTITUTE OF DRIVING TRAINING &
RESEARCH (IDTR)
1.7.1

Introduction

A good “Driver Training Institute” is aimed to develop right attitudes
towards driving responsibilities, instills understanding of Traffic Regulations
and creates good driving habits. By merely listening or reading, the driving
skills cannot be acquired. The skills have to be learned by each individual’s
own practice. Haphazard learning never promises a high grade of skills. If
young drivers are systematically trained, they can correct their mistakes and
help reduce accidents. If the Drivers are not trained well, ultimately the
general public will be endangered by their mistakes. Sound Driver Education
and training produce good results. A properly trained generation of new
Drivers would bring down the rate of accidents considerably in future.
With advancement of technology, not only has the condition of the
roads improved, but there has been an induction of new types of vehicles with
better and larger load carrying capacity. Besides, much more advanced
signaling systems have been introduced in the metropolitan and other major
cities. In spite of these advancements, India is ranked today amongst the
topmost countries having the maximum number of road accidents and also
road accident deaths. The large number of road accidents all the more
demands upon the better skills of the drivers so that safety of both man and
machine is maintained on the roads. In order to cope up with such demanding
circumstances, a technologically advanced “Institute of Driving Training and
Research (IDTR)” is all the more necessary to cater to the growing number of
drivers, as the number of vehicles on Indian roads are increasing manifold.
The proposed “IDTR” with ultra-modern facilities like IDTS, simulators etc.
would definitely go a long way in educating the drivers of various categories
in order that safety on the roads may be achieved. In order to train a good
driver, it is all the more important to breed a capable trainer or instructor. The
“IDTR” would, therefore, aim to churn out not only good quality drivers but
also excellent Training Instructors.

VVV

Vv

VV

VV

1.7.2 Objectives
To conduct training course for trainers or training instructors.
To conduct induction training course in driving of Heavy Motor Vehicles.
To conduct induction training course in driving of Light Motor Vehicles.
To conduct refresher and orientation training courses for the drivers who
are in service.
To conduct training course for the drivers who carry dangerous/hazardous
goods including random periodic evaluation.
Periodic training and evaluation of drivers of state transport undertakings.
Testing of aspiring drivers for issue of driving licence.
To organize road safety awareness campaigns for schools children and
other vulnerable groups

8

»
>»
»

To carry out accreditation, monitoring and audit of RDTCs in the allocated
region.
To carry out accident investigation in the state.
To carry out research on behavioral/attitudinal changes required to be
brought out in the drivers.

1.7.3.
1.7.3.1

Training Schemes
Training Course for Trainers

While the training of drivers is paramount the need for improving the standard
of Driver Training Instructors is of utmost importance as they are responsible
for the better breed of drivers, by inculcating in them better road sense and
skills. These Driver Training Instructors may be imparted training in the
institutes like CIRT and other testing agencies in the country. For meeting the
expenditure for such training, 1% of total approved amount may be earmarked
for such purpose.
Rule 24 of the C. M. V. Rules 1989 provides for establishing Driving Schools
and Establishments for which an application shall be made to the licensing
authority. The licensing authority while considering the application for grant

or renewal of license, amongst other things consider, as per Rule 24(3)(viii) of

the C. M. V. Rules, 1989, the following minimum qualifications prescribed for
Driving Instructor who is engaged for imparting driving instructions in the
driving school.
>
>»

a minimum educational qualification to be passed in the 12" standard with
a recognized Board or Institution,
a minimum driving experience of five years in addition to a certificate in a
course in motor mechanics or any other higher qualification in mechanical
engineering from an institution established by the Central or a State
Government or from an institution recognized by the Board of Technical

VV
WV

WV

Education of a State Government,

thorough knowledge of traffic sign specified in the Schedule to the Act and
the regulations made under section 118,
ability to demonstrate and to explain the functions of different
components, parts of the vehicles,
ability to demonstrate usage of simulators and different modes of driving;
adequate knowledge of English or the regional language of the region in
which the school or establishment is situated:

Provided that any person who has served as an instructor for a period of not
less than five years immediately before the commencement of these rules, is
exempted from the requirements of this sub-clause.
For a trainer to achieve proficiency in training, he should be thoroughly
trained in a proper manner so as to enable him to handle theory classes and
practical sessions systematically. The above mentioned qualifications as per
the CMV Rules, may not solely be enough to make him competent enough to
9

impart both theoretical and practical instructions during the course of the
driver training. The Driving Instructor is mainly entrusted with the following
responsibilities:

VVV

VV

>»

Imparting training to the trainees in the vehicle i.e. the proper use of the
controls etc.
Handling theory classes in different subjects
To oversee and supervise the driving performance of trainees with
reference to fuel conservation as well as safe driving.
To evaluate the performance of the trainees.
Good personal conduct & ethical business dealing.
Keeping himself updated on statistics and data related to the subject. Be
updated on changes in any laws, rules and regulations pertaining to road
safety.

This being a primary task, a specialized training programme for trainers
(Driving Instructors) may be conducted in the Training Institute. The State
Governments may be asked to get the private driver training schools registered
/ issued licence only with a condition that it would be mandatory for the
trainers in the training schools to pass out as trainers from the model driver
training schools, by making suitable amendments, if need be, in the C. M. V.
Rules. The registration of the driver training schools should be made subject to
the condition that the instructors of the driver training school should
successfully complete the course from the said institute. Existing schools
should have to send their instructors for the training programme and the
licence should get revalidated only after the revised conditions in this regard
are met.
The State Police Departments and the State Transport Undertakings can also
train their own trainers in order that the bulk of the force, which is deployed as
drivers, could be further trained in their respective training institutes besides
using the model driver training schools for training also.
The details of the scheme for imparting training course for trainers is detailed
in the Annexure - I (B).

1.7.3.2 Induction Training Course in Heavy Motor Vehicle Driving
Generally, the drivers of Heavy Motor Vehicles come from cleaner stage
having lack of knowledge in Traffic Rules & Regulations, driving skills and
maintenance of vehicle and also carry all types of bad driving habits. This
leads to the growth of road accident rate year by year. To overcome this, it is
necessary to train heavy vehicle drivers in a systematic manner on scientific
lines by selecting the candidates who complete one year in Light Motor
Vehicle Driving Licence.
As per the Rule 31(3) and 31(4) of Central Motor Vehicles Rules,

1989 the

training period for Transport Vehicles shall not be less than 30 days
Driving Hours shall not be less than 15 Hours.
10

and

Theoretical training should be made mandatory for HMV learners and must
have a lot of focus on controlling road rage, good road user attitude and
ehavior, stress management, tips to overcome physical and mental fatigue,
socially relevant topics such as AIDS, alcoholism & tobacco consumption,
besides topics related to driving a heavy vehicle and traffic education. It is
proposed that practical training be for 22 hours and theory for 16 hours since
such trainees are people who have first held the LMV licence for a period of
minimum one year. Hence they have road sense and confidence to drive in
traffic. They would have also undergone theory lessons earlier. This training
should span over 30-45 days.
The details of the scheme for imparting
driving is detailed in the Annexure-I I.
1.7.3.3

training

in heavy

motor

vehicle

Induction Training Course in Light Motor Vehicle Driving

The Motor Vehicles

Act,

1988

and Central Motor Vehicles

Rules,

1989

are

applicable to all classes of road users. Most important are the pre-cautions and
procedures laid down in the Driving Regulations in Section 118 of Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 which must be followed by all road users especially new
road signs. Hence, the LMV drivers also be trained like heavy vehicle drivers
in a Systematic manner so as to improve the road safety.
As per the Rule 31 (2) and 31 (4) of Central Motor Vehicles Rules,

1989, the

training period for non-transport vehicles shall not be less than 21 days and
driving hours shall not be less than 10 hours.

Moreover, as per the Rule 15 of C. M. V. Rules, 1989, “No person shall
appear for the test of competence to drive unless he has held a learner’s
licence for a period of at least 30 days”.
In view of the above, the training course period for a Light Motor Vehicle
training period has been prescribed as one month duration.
In one month duration, it is proposed to give 21 hrs. of steering practice and 710 hrs. of theory classes for each trainee based on the syllabus prescribed for
Light Motor Vehicle Driving in the Rule 31(2) of C.M.V. Rules, 1989.
The details of the scheme for imparting training in LMV
the Annexure — I (D).

11

driving is detailed in

1.7.3.4 Refresher
service

& orientation

capsule course

for drivers

who

are in

Vv

VVVVVVV

Refresher/Orientation training courses for short duration of 2-3 days may also
be conducted periodically in the Training Institute for the drivers who are in
service not only in State Road Transport Undertakings but also in Private
Sector as well as Public Sector Undertakings including Tank/Truck Drivers to
inculcate a sense of responsibility on road safety. The State Police and the
para-military personnel can also be included in the training schedule. The
courses may be conducted on the following topics by inviting Experts in the
appropriate field.
Behavioural Practices & stress management
Defensive Driving Techniques
Traffic Rules and Regulations
Emergency handling techniques
Maintenance & fuel conservation
Pollution and environment
Case studies on accidents to analyse the cause of accident, who was at
fault and how it could have been averted
Training Course on Safety Clinic for Accident Prone Drivers

A practical skill test and theoretical behavioural analysis test to be conducted
for such drivers to understand and analyse their improvement areas and give
special focus on those areas during the course of training. Simulators should
be used to train & assess such drivers in particular.
1.7.3.5 Recurring expenditure

The total recurring expenditure shall be borne by the Institute from the
resources it would generate by way of fees or other allied activities of IDTR.
However, the State Government could also consider providing grants till such
time the Institute becomes self-sustaining. Further in order that the curriculum
offered by the Institute for training is made popular, the fees could also be
subsidized initially. Grants may however be given for specific courses for the
underprivileged and drivers of the unorganized sectors by the Central
Government/State Government.
1.7.6

Driver Training Simulators and Automated Driving testing Track

To initiate driving in a safe and comfortable environment, to impart Driver
Training in a scientific manner and to evaluate trainees’ driving performance
at the end of the training course without bias and to test the skills of drivers
based on one’s reactions under various traffic and roadway conditions, driver
training simulators will be provided in the IDTR.
Simulators will also be provided to the driving schools/Institutes which have
already been set up as per the earlier scheme of this MoRTH or set up by the
12

grants of State Government. A certificate from State authorities will, however,

be required that these driving schools are functional.
The proposal of
providing the simulator in case of other driving schools may be considered
provided the State Government has recommended the proposal. However, the
amount to be released for simulators will be maximum of = 15.00 lakh or the
cost of simulators whichever is less.
Besides, funds will also be provided to the driving schools/Institutes which
have already been set up as per the earlier scheme of this MoRTH or set up by
the grants of State Government for upgrading the driving test track into
automated

test

track.

However,

a certificate

from

State

authorities

will,

however, be required that these driving schools are functional. The amount to
be released for up-gradation of the driving test track will be maximum of 2
3.00 Crore or actual cost of up-gradation whichever is less.
1.7.8

Conclusions

1)

The capacity of IDTR may be targeted to train approx. 20,000 (twenty

ii)

various categories of learners per annum.
The annual turn out may be increased in a phased manner depending
upon the augmentation of infrastructural facilities.

ili)

iv)
v)
vi)
vii)

thousand)

drivers

in refresher

and

around

2,000

(two

thousand)

in

The IDTR may also be utilized by the Transport Authorities/State
Transport
Undertakings/Police/Other
government
or
private
organizations to test the driving abilities of the candidates from public
who appear for M.V_I’s/ Driver Test for driving licence. It could also
be made mandatory for drivers to have been trained in the Institute for
applying for Government jobs.
All Central and State Government institutions in a particular State
could be asked to make it mandatory to send their drivers for refresher
courses periodically.
In addition, the IDTR shall periodically carry out third-party audit of
proposed RDTCs to ensure that they do not violate the prescribed
norms.
The Central Government may also make it mandatory for driving
license for transport vehicles to be issued as well as renewed only on
production of driving certificate from IDTRs.
The periodic accreditation of private driving schools for granting
license will be taken up by the IDTR.

13

ANNEXURE-I (B)
SCHEME FOR TRAINING COURSE FOR TRAINERS
i) MINIMUM STANDARDS

REQUIRED FOR TRAINEES:

The minimum requirements for the trainees to undergo the “Training
Course for Trainers” course is given as below:
Education

a pass in 12™ standard, preferably Graduates.

Driving Experience

Not less than 5 years

Category of Licence

Min LMVC for eligibility as Car Driving

Instructor

Min HMV for LMVC

& HMV Driving

Instructor

Certificate

a certificate in motor mechanic course

Knowledge

Thorough knowledge in road traffic rules and
regulations

it) COURSE DURATION :

Car Driving Instructor Course. Duration 80

hrs
spread over 12 weeks. Max batch size 25.

Course comprising of:
e 30 hrs theory
e =25 hrs Simulator /pract/ evaluation/
training in groups of 4
e And 25 hrs on the job Training.

LMVC Driving Instructor Advanced course.
Duration 40 hrs. spread over 6-10 days. Max
batch size 25.
Course comprising of:
e
14 hrs theory
e
$13 hrs Simulator /pract/ evaluation/
training in groups of 4
e And 13 hrs on the job Training.

14

HMV Driving Instructor
Specialisation Course. Duration 40 hrs spread
over 6-10 days. Max batch size 25.
Course comprising of:
e
10 hrs theory
e
$15 hrs Simulator/pract/ evaluation/
training in groups of 4
e And 15 hrs on the job Training.

iiia) COURSE CONTENTS

FOR CAR DRIVING INSTRUCTOR

Theory

Practice Session

COURSE:

Topic
Driving Theory

-

4

No. of Hrs.

Simulator Training

5

(initiation, rain, fog, hill, night, city
roads)
Traffic Education

-

4

Vehicle Mechanism

-

Instructional Techniques,

Theory

Human Relations,
Public Relations,
Aids Awareness
First Aid
Film Show

Communication Skills &

Presentation Techniques

Skill Driving Practice (in Driving Range)

3

3

Driving Practice in Ruraland Highway Roads

2

7

Vehicle Mechanism practicals - 2
Driving Practice in City -

2

Roads (in Dense and Lane
Traffic)

3

Vision Test Theory Test & Driving Skill

2

To observeInstructors in classroom

2

Test

Introduction and ice breakers

Level of Instruction
3
Planning, Control of lesson
Using Question and answer technique
Feedback and encouragement

To assist2
Instructors in classroom Training

Identifying type of trainee
3
Fault Identification
Fault Analysis
Remedial Action
Use of controls by Instructors
Handling slow learners
Handling problem participants

To observe & assist3
Instructors in Practical Training
To observe & assist2
Instructors conducting evaluation

Conducting test and evaluation
Attaining uniformity in marking
Total :

3

30

15

On the job Training: Independently Conducting various modules of Theory,
Practical Training and Conducting Test and Evaluation
25
hrs.
iii b) COURSE
COURSE:

CONTENTS

FOR

LMVC

Theory

DRIVING

INSTRUCTOR

Practice Session

Topic

No. of

Topic

Hrs.

No. of
Hrs.

Driving Theory

2

Simulator Training

3

Traffic Education
(specific rules &

2

roads
Skill Driving Practice
(in Driving Range)

3

commercial vehicles

laws

for

(rain, fog, hill, night, city

Vehicle Mechanism Theory
for LMVC

2

Driving Practice in Rural
and Highway Roads

2

Vehicle

2

Driving

2

maintenance

Pollution & Environment
AIDS Awareness

2

Journey as an Instructor
Types of Trainees
Handling
problem
participants
&
slow

2

Facilitating interaction
communication

and

1

Conducting
evaluation

and

1

First Aid
Alcohol & Tobacco

learners,
assessment
Trainee progress

Total Hrs.:

test

Practice

in City

Roads (in Dense and Lane
Traffic)
Vision Test,

Theory Test
Skill Test

&

Driving

To
observe
Instructors
evaluation

&
assist
conducting

2

1

of

14

13

On the Job Training: Independently Conducting various modules of Theory,
Practical Training and Conducting Test and Evaluation
13
hrs.
16

iii c) COURSE CONTENTS FOR HMV DRIVING INSTRUCTOR COURSE:
Theory

Practice Session

Topic
Driving

No. of
Hrs.

Theory

&

Traffic

2

Education

Working
systems

Topic

principle — of

1

No. of
Hrs.

Simulator Training

3

(rain, fog, hill, night, city
roads)

Skill Driving Practice
(in Driving Range)

3
2

Law and driving

1

Highway hypnosis
Highway etiquette
Depth perception
Vehicle
maintenance
Pollution & Environment

1

Driving Practice in Rural
and Highway Roads
Reversing, parking

2

Uphill & downhill driving

1

2

Driving

2

Teaching methodologies
A model Instructor

Conducting
evaluation

Total Hrs.:

test

Practice

in City

1

Roads (in Dense and Lane
Traffic)

and

1

10

Vision Test,
Theory Test
Skill Test
To
observe
Instructors
evaluation

&

Driving

&
assist
conducting

2
1

15

On the Job Training: Independently Conducting various modules of Theory,
Practical Training and Conducting Test and Evaluation
15
hrs.
The above requirements would not be applicable for trainers / instructors who
are being deputed for training from State Transport Undertakings, Police
Departments and other Government Departments. The qualifications for these
sponsored trainers would be as per the qualifications laid down by their
respective Departments.
iv) EVALUATION: At the end of the training course, the trainees may be
evaluated in theory portions and in driving skills and on instructional abilities.
v) CERTIFICATE: A certificate also may be awarded who successfully
completes the Training Course. The minimum pass percentage for Instructors
is 85%.
17

ANNEXURE-I (C)
SCHEME FOR INDUCTION TRAINING COURSE
IN HEAVY MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVING
i) MINIMUM STANDARDS

REQUIRED FOR TRAINEES:

The minimum requirements for the trainees to undergo Heavy Vehicle
Driver Training are given as below :
Education

:

Fluent in reading and writing in
Regional Language.

Driving License

:

1 year completed in Light Motor
Vehicle Driving.

Physical Condition

:

Good vision and free from other
Physical disabilities.

it) COURSE DURATION _ :

38 Hrs spread over 6 Weeks
(16 hrs theory & 22 hrs driving practice)

ili) SYLLABUS:
The syllabus as prescribed in Rule 31(3) of Central Motor Vehicles rules,

1989 for Heavy Motor Vehicles (the lessons cover parts E, F, G, H, I, J & K)

may be followed.

Further, syllabus as prescribed in Rule 31J(1)C for Refresher/Orientation
Courses of short duration of 2-3 days may be followed.
iv) COURSE CONTENTS:
Theory — 16 hours
Theory Topics

Hours

Driving Theory

2

Traffic Education
Vehicle Mechanism Theory
Vehicle Maintenance & Repair
Public Relation
First Aid & Human Psychology
Road Rage & Stress Management
Cause & Type of Accidents, Driver’s Responsibility in the
levent of Accident

2
2
1
1
1
2
2

AIDS awareness; Tobacco & Alcohol

1

Pollution and Environment

1

Driving Fuel Efficiency

1

18

Practical - 22 hours
Topic

Basic Driving Practice (in Driving Range)
Skill Driving Practice (in Driving Range)
Driving Practice in Rural and Highway Roads
Driving Practice in City Roads (in Dense and Lane Traffic)

Hours

2
4
4
3

Uphill & Downhill Driving

2

Reversing, Parking
Simulator Training (initiation, rain, fog, night , hilly terrain

2
3

Driving Fuel Efficiency
Theory Test & Evaluation

1
2

etc.)

v) EVALUATION:
Theory test to be conducted from a large question bank of min 1000 questions
covering all aspects of vehicle and road safety. Question paper to be randomly
generated through a pseudorandom software. Each topic to be assigned a certain
weightage for the no of questions to be picked up. Question paper of 40 Questions.
Minimum pass percentage for theory is 60%.
Practical test to be conducted on a pre-identified checksheet covering all parameters
and aspects of driving. Minimum score required to pass the practical test is 60 out of a
max of 100. Those committing a serious or dangerous fault would be disqualified
irrespective of the total score.
vi) Eligibility to Write Examination:
A minimum of 85% attendance is required.
vii) Extension of Training:
For shortage of attendance or failure in Driving Practice, the training period will be
extended in terms of hrs depending upon the candidates requirement by collecting
additional fee.
viii) Failure in Examination:

If anybody fails in any theory paper or driving practice, the candidate has to re-appear
for the Examination.
ix) Test: The Trainees those who passed the driving Performance Test called Internal
Trade Test conducted by the Institute will only be sent to Motor Vehicle Inspector’s
Test for Heavy Vehicle Driving Licence Endorsement.
x) Certificate: After passing in all Theory papers and Motor Vehicle Inspector’s Test,
the Proficiency Test Certificate will be issued to the candidates.
19

ANNEXURE-I (D)
SCHEME FOR INDUCTION TRAINING COURSE IN
LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVING
i) MINIMUM STANDARDS

REQUIRED FOR TRAINEES:

The minimum requirements for the trainees to undergo Light Motor
Vehicle Driving Training are given as below:
Education

:

Fluent in reading and writing in
Regional Language

Physical Condition

—:

Good vision and free from other
Physical disabilities.

it) COURSE DURATION _ :

29 Hrs spread over 4 weeks
(8 hrs theory & 21 hrs driving practice)

iii) SYLLABUS : The syllabus as prescribed in Rule 31 (2) of Central Motor
Vehicles Rules, 1989 for Light Motor Vehicles (the lessons cover parts A, B,
C, F, G & K) may be followed.

iv) COURSE CONTENTS

:

Theory - 8 hours

Traffic Education;

Basic Vehicle Mechanism Theory Demo;
Public Relations & First Aid;

Road Etiquette & Mannerism Road Rage;
Causes of Accidents & Case Studies;

Driving Fuel Efficiency.

Hours
1
epee
et ety

Driving Theory;

Theory Topics

Practical - 21 hours

Topic
Basic Driving Practice (in Driving Range);
Skill Driving Practice (in Driving Range);

Hours
2
2

Driving Practice in Rural and Highway Roads;

2

Driving Practice in City Roads (in Dense and Lane Traffic);
Uphill & Downhill Driving;

4
2

Reversing, Parking;
Simulator Training (initiation, rain, fog, night);

2
4

Driving Fuel Efficiency;
Test & Evaluation.

1
2

Classroom training through interactive sessions supported with films, graphics and
animations, of duration 8 hrs., covering all topics listed above. Practical training
20

for 21 hrs to be given as per a structured Driving Training manual outlining the
coverage for each session. Progress of trainee to be recorded and appraised after
each session.
v) EVALUATION:
At the end of the Training Course, the trainees are evaluated in Theory as well
as in Driving Practice. Theory test to be conducted from a large question bank
of questions picked up randomly through a pseudorandom software. Question
paper of 40 questions with pre-assigned weightages to different topics.
vi) ELIGIBILITY TO WRITE EXAMINATIONS:
A minimum of 85% attendance is required.
x)

EXTENSION OF TRAINING:
For shortage of attendance or failure in Driving Practice, the training period
may be extended as per requirement.

x)

FAILURE IN EXAMINATION:
If anybody fails in any theory paper or driving practice, the candidate has to reappear.

x)

TEST:

The minimum score required to pass the test is 60% in theory as well as
practical test. The Trainees who passed the Driving Performance Test called
Internal Trade Test conducted by the Institute will only be sent to Motor
Vehicle
Inspector's
Test for Light Motor
Vehicle
Driving
Licence
Endorsement.
x) CERTIFICATE:
After passing in all Theory papers and Motor Vehicle Inspector’s Test, the
Proficiency Test Certificate may be issued to the candidates.
21

ANNEXURE - I (E)
DETAILS OF INFRASTRUCTURE

REQUIREMENT

i). Land:

To establish a full-fledged driving center with various infrastructure facilities
such

as

class

rooms,

office

room,

workshop,

driving

laboratory,

hostels,

canteen and driving range, a minimum of 10 to 15 acres of land is required.
ii). Buildings:
a) Class Rooms:

For handling theory classes, 5 class rooms of size each 8 m x 8 m are required
in which 3 class room will be utilized for Heavy vehicle driver trainees, one
will be utilized for light vehicle driver trainees and another one will be utilized
for conducting refresher and special training courses for the drivers who are in
service including the drivers who carry hazardous/dangerous goods.
b) Office and Staff Rooms:

Three more rooms of size each 8 m x 8 m are required for the use of office and
staff.
c) Driving Laboratory:
One hall of size 25 m x 8 m is required to display various systems and cut
section models of vehicle and to display models about various driving
procedures.
d) Workshop:
One shed of size 20 m x 12 m with A.C. sheet roof is also required to carryout
day to day repair works and maintenance of the training vehicles.
e) Canteen:

For the benefit of trainees, canteen facilities are also proposed to be provided
in a separate building of size 36 m x 8 m including recreation with necessary
furniture and fittings.
(f) Hostels:

For the benefit of the trainees, hostel facilities also may be provided within the
Training Institute campus including recreation facilities. To accommodate
about 75 candidates at a time, a minimum one Hostel Block of size 46 m x 6 m

with 8 rooms of size each 5 m x 4 m may be constructed.
22

ili). Furniture and Fittings:
For trainees: For each trainee a chair-cum-writing pad may be provided in the
class rooms. To handle classes at a time for 35 heavy vehicle driver trainees,
15 light vehicle driver trainees and about 40 drivers of refresher and special
training courses, 150 nos. of chair-cum-writing desk along with fittings may
be provided.
ii) For staff: For office and staff also necessary furniture and fittings may be
provided.
iv). Vehicles:

To start with, it is proposed to train about 20,000 (twenty thousand) drivers in
the refresher category and 2,000 (two thousand) in the learners category every
year. Requisite vehicles in each category may accordingly be purchased.
v). Teaching and Training Equipments:
a) Working Models of various systems of an Automobile:
- Cooling System
- Transmission System
- Fuel system
- Electrical system
b) Cut Section Models:

Rod

Working Models
- Petrol Engine ( 4 Cylinder)
- Diesel Engine (4 Cylinder)
- Diesel Engine (6 Cylinder)
- Rear Axle Assembly

c) Failed Components:
- Clutch cover Assembly
- Clutch Disc
- Gear Box Gears:
Top Gear Shaft
Main Shaft

Non-Working Models
- Front

axle

with

Pull

&

and Tie rod Assembly
- Gear Box Assembly
- Steering Box Assembly
- Brake Chamber
- E-1 Brake Valve
- Air Filter
- Unloader Valve
- Axle Shaft
- Crown wheel with pinion
- Starter Motor
- Alternator

Counter Gear

d) Static Models in Driving Procedures:
With the help of the Vehicle Toys the following driving
procedures may also be displayed :
- MSM & PSL Safety Routines
- IPDE Principle
- Stopping Distance
- Following Distance
- Curve Handling

Push

e) Traffic Sign Boards
f) Over head Projector

xi) Transparency sheets

hi) TV & VCR/VCD

xiil) VHS

g) Slide Projector

xii) 16 mm Slides

1) Multimedia Projector

xiv) VCDs

j) Magnetic Board

vi). Workshop Equipments:
To carry out day-to-day repairs and maintenance of vehicles, complete set
of tools and other accessories such as air compressor, puncture kit with
tyre lever, wheel brace, jack and tyre pressure gauge, trolley jack, grease
gun, spanners ( a set each of fix spanners, box spanners, pliers, screw
drivers, screw spanners and hammer), battery charger, a fully equipped
first aid box are required for workshop for use in emergency.
vii). Testing equipments:
To check the physical abilities of the drivers including vision test, the
following testing equipments are also proposed to provide in the Driver
Training Institute.
Vision drum placed 20 ft /6 mts. from the person.
Trial set with frame
Ishihara chart (for colour vision testing)

Near vision chart
Weighing machine
Height meter (for measuring height)
viii). Office Equipments:

EPABX

Xerox Machine, fax machine, lamination machine,

& telephone instruments, modem, internet connection and Computers

with accessories.

ix). Library:
One Library may also be established for the benefit of the
trainees covering books on traffic rules and regulations, driving procedures,
vehicle maintenance and repairs.
x). Driver Training Simulator:- To initiate driving in a safe and comfortable
environment, to impart Driver Training in a scientific manner and to evaluate
trainees’ driving performance at the end of the training course without bias

and to test the skills of drivers based on one’s reactions under various traffic

and roadway conditions, driver training simulators must be provided in the
Training Institute. Simulators will also be provided to the driving schools
which have already been set up as per the earlier scheme or set up in any
scheme

of the

State Government.

A

certificate from

however, be required that these schools are functional.

State

authorities

will,

xi). Driving Range: A Driving Range is also proposed to formulate by
incorporating different types of manoeuvres to impart off-road driving practice
so as to learn basic driving procedures and practice driving skills in various
situations. The details of roads proposed to be provided with various
manoeuvres in the driving range and its purpose is as explained below: {vide

Annexure-I (F)}.

24

Annexure — I (F)

Road
i) Two Lane Straight
Practice
Road

Purpose

:

Used

for

freshers

to

impart

Basic

Driving

ie. starting — moving — stopping — gear changing
steering control — passing — overtaking —
curve
handling — driving in crawling speed —
low speed —
average speed — high speed —
following distance —
stopping distance —
stopping the vehicle in case of
brake
failure, etc. can be practiced.
ii) Parking
Practice in 3 types of parking manoeuvres i.e.
parking
in
parallel,
angular
and
perpendicular to
road. Simulating parking
operations in bus stations
and truck parks.
iii) Hump Road
Parking, stopping and starting operations on
sloped
road i.e. to practice clutch balance point
and bitting
point and also cautious driving
due to reduced sight
distance.
iv) Dip Road
To educate the trainees to know the level of
water
stream in the causeway and the driving
procedure to
be adopted while driving in such water
streams.
v) 3 Point Turn &
This is to train the drivers on difficult turning on
restricted roads 5 Point Turn to take UTurn.

vi) S-Shaped Bend

V Bend

vii) 8-Shaped Bend
sharp
viii) Reversing box
reversing
ix) 4 Lane and

discipline,

6 Lane Road

x) Speed Tract

such
burst, etc.
x1) Hill Track

driving.

xii). Driving Range Aids:

To familiarize the trainees with difficult
manoeuvres and without much of
declaration/acceleration.
To train the drivers on left and right steering,
turning and negotiating round about.
To educate drivers on proper methods of
and turning.
Lane
changing,

Lane

selection

and

Lane

stopping before stop line, junction approach, etc.
can be practiced.
Controlling of vehicle in emergency situations
as Two Lane Road brake failure, tyre
A

hill track

to

practice

uphill

and

downhill

The Driving Range Aids such as erection of road
traffic signs and automatic light signals, road
markings,

traffic

barriers,

traffic

bollards,

lighting
and
other
road _ furniture
and
appurtenance may also be provided in the
driving range.

2.

SCHEME FOR TIER-II (RDTCs)

2.1 General Guidelines

(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

The Ministry intends to set up RDTCs in the States/UTs during the 15"
Finance Commission Cycle period based on a criteria of population i.e.
one RDTC per 2.50 crore projected population. In cases of States/UTs
whose project population is less than 2.50 crore_and which are not
covered under the scheme so far, one RDTC per State/UT would be
sanctioned.
The RDTCs will set up and operated through partnership between state
government and private developer. The proposal should invariably
contain details of complete financial support inclusive of land cost (if
any) through private party.
Land for the RDTCs may be procured or leased for minimum 33 years
by the private partner/state government and should have a clear title.
Proposals received from State Governments/ Private Developers having
encroachment and encumbrance free land in their possession should be
given priority in the setting up of new Regional Driving Training
Centre (RDTC).

(vy)

(vi)
(vii)

(viii)

(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)
(xiii)

The
proposal
should
invariably
contain
a project
appraisal
report/feasibility report with reference to demand, vicinity of city,
layout etc. by an independent reputed agency and comments of State
Government, if any.
The proposal should contain a categorical recommendation of the State
Government.
The project should be completed within 18 months from the date of
release of 1* installment.
The grant of the Central Government shall be one time grant for the
capital component of the proposal and the estimates on this account
should be based on latest approved CPWD or State PWD Schedule of
Rates. However, actual procurement should be made by following
tender procedure to obtain most competitive price and quality products.
The capital component of the proposal may include modern equipments
such as innovative driving test system (IDTS) using Radio Frequency
Identification (RFID) tags or video recording, simulators, computers
and other modern aids.
The proposal should also envisage self-sufficiency in meeting the
recurring expenditure as this shall not be provided by the Central/State
Government.
The institute will be administered by a society comprising of
representatives of state government and the private promoter.
The staff employed at the RDTCs shall mandatorily have to undergo
training for trainers and will be evaluated for suitability at one of the
existing IDTRs designated by the Ministry.
The fee structure for the training courses will be decided by the Society
administering the institute with the approval of state government.
The RDTCs shall submit half yearly performance report.
26

It shall be obligatory on the part of the RDTCs to implement the
schemes run by Central Government on drivers training on the terms
and conditions set out by the Central Government.
More than one proposal for RDTC may be considered across State
(excluding the district in the State where IDTR is proposed or
developed).
The Central Government shall give preference to those States/UTs,
which make provisions in the motor vehicle rules to mandate driving
training for certain categories of drivers, for renewal of heavy motor
vehicle driving licence and vest the institutes with certain functions like
testing of aspirants for issue of driving licence.
The State Government will make efforts to implement the scheme in
respect of RTDCs in the rest of the state on its own, with the support of
private partners within 3 years of implementation of pilot scheme.
The training courses would be compliant with the National Skill

(xiv)

(xv)
(xvl)

(xvii)

(Xvili)

Qualification Framework (NSQF).

Annual audit of the Institutes by the State to verify the utilisation shall
be mandatory.
The proposal for setting up of IDTR should invariably contain
provisions of Automated driving test tracks.
CIRT, Pune will play role of monitoring agency under the scheme to
provide Technical and handholding support for IDTR and RDTC
projects under the Scheme. However, States/UTs will have option to
choice services of any HT or NIT, state Government Engineering
College or any competent Technical agency for Technical and
handholding support for IDTR and or RDTC projects under the scheme
in place of CIRT, Pune.

(xix)

(xx)
(xx1)

2.2 Who Can Send the Proposal
Any
agencies
Manufacturers’

such
as NGO/Automobile
Associations/Vehicle
Association/Autonomous
Body/Private
Vehicle

Manufacturers,
ITI, authorized and recommended
by the State
Governments, in collaboration with the State and Central Government.

The Central Government will give the preference to those agencies
who submit the proposal for setting up of RDTC for women only. In
such centres, training will be imparted by lady instructors and trainee
will be women only.

ao

oP

2.2.1

Criteria of the eligibility for agencies other than State Government
Must be registered with the appropriate legal authority.
Must be a clean record holder since inception.
Must have an annual financial turnover of minimum & 50 lakh.
Should have experience of 3 years in the field of Road Safety.
Note: Private agencies are required to hypothecate the land/(to be built
up infrastructure) in the name of the Ministry of Road Transport &
Highways, Transport Bhawan, 1 Parliament Street New Delhi, till the
utilization of funds released to them and submission of Utilization
Certificate duly certified by CA in this respect.
27

2.3.

INFRASTRUCTURE

REQUIREMENTS

About minimum of 3 acres of land would be required to set up a RDTC
with various infrastructure facilities such as class rooms with teaching
aids like OHP, T.V. and DVD, computers and Multimedia Projector for
handling theory classes on Traffic Rules and Regulations, Driving
Procedures, Vehicle Mechanism,

and future technologies

Public Relations and First Aid. latest

for the purpose of teaching

such as online

tutoring, extensive interactive simulation, interactive screen and touch

terminals etc. in place of outdated shall be adopted as teaching aids.

To display cut section models of various working systems of an
automobile, including failed components as well as static models on
driving procedures, a separate driving lab is also required.
Testing equipments to test physical abilities of drivers including eye
vision, and driving range with various types of manoeuvres to impart
off-road driving practice in basic driving procedures and driving
practice in skill development, including installation of RFID/Video
based Innovative Driving Test System (IDTS) are required.
The other infrastructure such as workshop shed for maintenance and
repairs of training vehicles and pantry facilities are also to be provided
in the RDTC itself. The details of the infrastructure requirement are
given in the Annexure-II (A).

2.4 FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS
The setting up of tier-IIT RDTC(s) is envisaged with financial support
through private party.
The Central Government will provide the
financial support subject to the maximum of % 5.50 Crore per centre
(all inclusive) for the pilot phase thereafter the state has to implement
the scheme its own post evaluation of the pilot project.
The land will be provided by the State Government. However the land
could also be provided by the private party but the cost of the land will
not be added towards project cost. The Cost of land development and
Compound Wall for RDTC will be borne by the State Government or
the Private Developer. Any additional requirement of fund will be met
either by the State Government or Private Party. However, to make the
proposed RDTC self sustainable, the Central Government shall make
necessary amendments in CMVR to mandate the grant of new licenses
from LMV to HMV, renewal of HMV licenses and refresher training
only on certification from the RDTCs of the respective region (if
RDTC exist).

28

Funds shall be released as per the progress report, UC and
recommendation of the Monitoring Agency, engaged for appraising the
progress and recommendation for next installment based on the
following milestones:SL No. | Milestone

be

1.

the

2.
3.
Total

Amount
to
releaed
Mobilization advance: After signing of MoU
|40%
of
between State Govt. and the private developer, | project cost
local clearances for the project, formation of
society, hypothecation of land Gf applicable),
transfer of funds for land development and
compound wall into the account of the society.
After Land development, construction of the |50%
of
compound wall, 50% construction of Training | project cost
Centre, Test track and other amenities.

After recommendation of the closure
project by the monitoring agency:

the

of the | 10%
of _ the
project cost
100%

In addition, the monitoring agency will be paid = 5 lakh for technical and
handholding support and monitoring of the project. It will also be releases in
instalments at the time of release of project cost in similar instalments.
Further, in respect of RDTC sanctioned on the land owned by the private
partner, the funds under the scheme will be transferred by the State
Government to an account in the name of the society. The funds from this
account will be utilised for the project only with joint signature of two
members of the society out of which one will be member representative of the
private partner and one member representative of the State Government.
Expenditure

Advance

Transfer

(EAT)

module

expenditures on the project under the scheme.

2.5 RECURRING

of PFMS

shall be used

for

EXPENDITURE

The total recurring expenditure shall be borne by the RDTCs
resources it would generate by way of fees or other allied activities.

from

the

However, the RDTCs may seek grants from State Government/other stake
holders till such time the Centre becomes self-sustaining. Further in order that
the curriculum offered by the Centre for training is made popular, the fees
could also be subsidized initially. Grants may however be given for specific
courses for the underprivileged and drivers of the unorganized sectors by the
Central Government / State Government.
29

2.6 Management of RDTC
For overseeing the construction and operation of the RDTC, a society shall be
formed. The society will comprise of the representatives of Ministry of Road
Transport, Govt. of India, State Government and Private partners.
2.7 Responsibilities
Responsibilities

of

Central,

State

Government

and

Private

Partner

The parties involved in the establishment and management of RDTC are the
Central Government, State Government and PPP Partner. The responsibilities
of the individual parties are given below:2.7.1 Central Government

Fund the establishment of RDTC subject to maximum up to % 5.50
crore (all inclusive).

If required, further necessary amendments will be incorporated in
CMVRules to make project viable.
A
mechanism
for grievance redressal
shall also be
institutionalized under the chairpersonship of Joint Secretary,
MoRTH for handling grievances wherein intervention of MoRTH
is required.
Should request to OEM to sponsor vehicles and cut section model
(rejected /testing vehicles ) to these institutes
The ministry should support in procurements training and testing
equipments from the national/ international manufactures at a
subsidized rate.
2.7.2

State Government

Ensure execution of the RDTC projects by following the norms in
the stipulated time periods.
Ensure effective utilization of the infrastructure being set up in the
RDTC through legislative provisions.
Necessary amendments will be incorporated in CMVR to make
project commercially viable by ensuring minimum guaranteed
number of people get trained and certified through the centre
Government should make it mandatory into Motor Vehicle Act
through Government Notification / Government Regulation to
issue all the new licenses and renewal only through the IDTR and
RDTC and also ask all PSU’s and Government organization to
recruit drivers and train them through the system
Arrangement for annual performance audit of the RDTC and
inspection of RDTC on regular intervals.
Identify and allot requisite land of minimum of 3 acres for setting
up the institute.
Recognise the RDTCs as an accredited establishment for the
purposes of exemption from driving licence testing requirement at
30

the time of applying for driving license of the successfully pass
driving licence aspirants at these RDTCs as per provisions under
the CMVRule,

1989.

All educational institutions should participate for regular programs
on road safety conducted by the institute
2.7.3 Private Partner

Play the lead role in the establishment and management of the
RDTC.
Sponsor the vehicles, training aggregates and teaching aids in the
RDTC.
Assist the Government through it requisite experience in relation to
various processes related to setting up and managing operations of
training and training centres professionally, motor driving training,
imparting technical assistance and skills in the said profession for
maintenance of vehicles.
Provide support in the form of designing course content,
curriculum,

technical

assistance,

guidance,

vehicles

required

for

training, know-how and services, training aggregates, training
materials including vehicles manuals and teaching aids for driver
training.
Provide employment opportunities to the deserving qualified and
trained drivers at the RDTC through their business processes.
Impart free training to the instructors of the RDTC on a regular
basis regarding the latest vehicle technologies.
To bring in professionalism in the area of driver training.
Design, develop and operate the institute on time line stipulated by
the government
Bring in new technology and modern tools and process Run the
institute as a self sustainable mode
Complete Administration and run the institute under the guidelines
of the government
Content development Procurement of equipments/ tools for
running the institute
Submit periodical progressive reports to the government.
Install audit and review mechanism for quality assurance.

8.

Details of a Standard RDTCs are given at Annexure - II.
31

Annexure- II

DETAILS
CENTRES

OF A STANDARD
(RDTCs)

REGIONAL

DRIVER

TRAINING

2.8.1 INTRODUCTION
RDTCs are aimed to cater to impart professional driving skills through
adequate infrastructure and trained instructors. Accordingly the RDTCs are
proposed to be developed across State (excluding district where IDTR is
proposed or developed in the State). The network of proposed RDTCs as well
as IDTR will cater to impart driving skills to the vehicle users of the vast
region of each State.
The proposed RDTCs preferably with modern facilities like simulators,
driving range, tools and equipments etc. would definitely go a long way in
educating the drivers of various categories in order that safety on the roads
may be achieved. The RDTCs would, therefore, aim to train not only good
quality drivers but also Training Instructors.

VV

V

V

VW

VV

VW

2.8.2 OBJECTIVES
To conduct induction training course in driving of Light Motor Vehicles.
To conduct induction and refresher training course in driving of Heavy
Motor Vehicles.
To conduct induction training course in driving of motorized 2-wheelers.
To conduct Refresher and Orientation Training Courses for the drivers
who are in service.
To conduct Refresher and Orientation Training module for the drivers who
violate traffic regulations.
To conduct training course for the drivers who carry dangerous/hazardous
goods including random periodic evaluation.
To organize road safety awareness campaigns for school children and
other vulnerable groups.
Testing of aspiring drivers for issue of driving licence.
To carry out periodic accreditation of driving schools in the allocated
region.

2.8.3

TRAINING SCHEMES

To begin with RDTCs may start training for motorized 2 wheeler and light
motor vehicles and Refresher Training, License Evaluation in Phase I
commensurate

with

infrastructure

facilities

mentioned

at Annexure

II (A),

while the HMV courses may be included in Phase IJ on augmenting
infrastructure and driving range as mentioned in Annexure II (B).

the

2.8.3.1 Induction training course in Heavy Motor Vehicle driving
Generally the drivers of Heavy Motor Vehicles come from cleaner stage
having lack of knowledge in Traffic Rules & Regulations, driving skills and
maintenance of vehicle and also carry all types of bad driving habits. This
32

leads to the growth of road accident rate year by year. To overcome this, it is
necessary to train heavy vehicle drivers in a systematic manner on scientific
lines by selecting the candidates who complete 1 year in Light Motor Vehicle
Driving Licence.
As per the Rule 31(3) and 31(4) of Central Motor Vehicles Rules,

1989 the

training period for Transport Vehicles shall not be less than 30 days
Driving Hours shall not be less than 15 hrs.

and

Theoretical training should be made mandatory for HMV learners and must
have a lot of focus on controlling road rage, good road user attitude and
behaviour, stress management, tips to overcome physical and mental fatigue,
socially relevant topics such as AIDS, alcoholism & tobacco consumption,
besides topics related to driving a heavy vehicle and traffic education. It is
proposed that practical training be for 20 hours and theory for 16 hours since
such trainees are people who have first held the LMV licence for a period of
minimum one year. Hence, they have road sense and confidence to drive in
traffic. They would have also undergone theory lessons earlier. This training
should span over 30-45 days.
The

details of the scheme

for imparting

driving are detailed in the Annexure-I(C).

2.8.3.2. INDUCTION
TRAINING
VEHICLE DRIVING
The new Motor Vehicles Act,

1988

training

COURSE

in heavy
IN

motor

LIGHT

vehicle

MOTOR

and Central Motor Vehicles Rules,

1989

are applicable to all classes of road users. Most important are the new precautions and procedures laid down in the Driving Regulations in Section 118
of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 which must be followed by all road users
especially new road signs. Hence, the LMV drivers also be trained like heavy
vehicle drivers in a systematic manner so as to improve the road safety.
As per the Rule 31 (2) and 31 (4) of Central Motor Vehicles Rules,

1989, the

training period for non-transport vehicles shall not be less than 21 days and
driving hours shall not be less than 10 hours.

Moreover, as per the Rule 15 of C. M. V. Rules, 1989, “No person shall
appear for the test of competence to drive unless he has held a learner’s
licence for a period of at least 30 days”.
In view of the above, the training course period for a Light Motor Vehicle
training period has been prescribed as one month duration.
In one month duration, it is proposed to give 20 hours of steering practice and
7-10 hours of theory classes for each trainee based on the syllabus prescribed
for Light Motor Vehicle Driving in the Rule 31(2) of C. M. V. Rules, 1989
(the lessons cover Parts A, B, C, F, G & K).

The details of the scheme for imparting training in LMV
the Annexure — I (D).

33

driving is detailed in

2.8.3.3 REFRESHER & ORIENTATION
DRIVERS WHO ARE IN SERVICE

CAPSULE

COURSE

FOR

V

VVVVV

VV

Refresher/Orientation Training courses for short duration of 2-3 days may also
be conducted periodically in the Training Institute for the drivers who are in
service not only in State Road Transport Undertakings but also in Private
Sector as well as Public Sector Undertakings including Tank/Truck Drivers to
inculcate a sense of responsibility on road safety. The State Police and the
para-military personnel can also be included in the training schedule.
The
courses may be conducted on the following topics by inviting Experts in the
appropriate field.
Behavioural Practices & stress management
Defensive Driving Techniques
Traffic Rules and Regulations
Emergency handling techniques
Maintenance & fuel conservation
Pollution and environment
Case studies on accidents to analyse the cause of accident, who
was at fault and how it could have been averted
Training Course on Safety Clinic for Accident Prone Drivers

A practical skill test and theoretical behavioural analysis test to be conducted
for such drivers to understand and analyze their improvement areas and give
special focus on those areas during the course of training. Simulators should
be used to train & assess such drivers in particular.
2.8.4

Up-gradation of ITI into Driving School:

There are a large no. of Industrial Training Institutes (ITI) in the country.
These ITI are having sufficient infrastructure such as laboratory, cut sections,
etc. Therefore, by providing certain infrastructure such as simulators, driving
test track, etc., an ITI may also impart driving training. Therefore funds will
also be provided to the ITI for creating infrastructure so that it could impart
driving training. However, a certificate from State authorities will be required
that the ITT is functional.
2.8.4

Conclusions:

cod

The capacity of RDTC may be targeted to train
pprox.. 20,000
(Twenty thousand) drivers in refresher and in various categories
including 2 wheeler and HMV of learners per annum. To begin with
RDTCs may start training for motorized 2 wheeler and light motor
vehicles and refresher training and licence testing in Phase-I.
The annual turn out may be increased in a phased manner depending
upon the augmentation of infrastructural facilities.
The RDTCs may also be utilized by the Transport Authorities/ State
Transport
Undertakings/Police/.)
Other
government
or
private
organizations to test the driving abilities of the candidates from public
who appear for M.V_I’s/ Driver Test for driving licence. It could also
be made mandatory for drivers to have been trained in the Institute for
applying for Government jobs.

ii)
iii)

iv)

v)
vi)

vii)

All Central and State Government institutions in a particular State
could be asked to make it mandatory to send their drivers for refresher
courses periodically.
The Central Government may also make it mandatory for driving
license for transport vehicles to be issued or renewed only on
production of driving certificate from RDTCs.
The periodic accreditation of private driving schools for granting
license will be taken up by the RDTCs.
Road safety awareness programmes for school children may be taken
up regularly by RDTCs to inculcate knowledge about road discipline/
etiquettes, traffic signs, road regulations etc, for which nominal fees
may be charged from the schools.

35

ANNEXURE - II (A)
DETAILS OF INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENT

FOR RDTC

i). Land:

To establish a full fledged driving center with various infrastructure facilities
such as class rooms,

office room,

workshop,

driving laboratory, canteen and

driving range, about 3- 5 acres of land is required. However, in order to meet
heavy capital expenses for acquiring land, it is proposed to develop RDTC in 2
phases (Phase 1 and Phase 2). In Phase 1, the RDTC may start operation on a
built up area of about 2,500 sq. ft. buildings(through hire or acquire), and in
Phase 2, either track and other basic facilities may be developed by acquiring
additional land or full-fledged RDTCs may be developed on a new location.
ii). Buildings:
a) Class Rooms:

For handling theory classes, 2 class rooms of size each 8 m x 5 m are required
in which 1 class room will be utilized for Heavy vehicle driver trainees, one
will be utilized for light vehicle driver trainees and for conducting refresher
and special training courses for the drivers who are in service including the
drivers who carry hazardous/dangerous goods.
b) Office and Staff Rooms:

One room of size each 5 m x 5 m are required for the use of office and staff.
c) Driving Laboratory cum mini workshop:
One hall of size 10 m x 8 m is required to display various systems and cut
section models of vehicle and to display models about various driving
procedures.
d) Pantry room:
For the benefit of trainees, pantry facilities are also proposed to be provided in
a separate building of size 5 m x 3 m including necessary furniture and
fittings.
iii). Furniture and Fittings:
a) For trainees: For each trainee a chair-cum-writing pad may be provided in
the class rooms. To handle classes at a time for 35 heavy vehicle driver
trainees, 15 light vehicle driver trainees and about 40 drivers of refresher and
special training courses, 70 nos. of chair-cum-writing desk along with fittings
may be provided.
b) For staff: For office and staff also necessary furniture and fittings may be
provided.
36

iv). Vehicles:
To start with, it is proposed to train about 11,000 (eleven thousand) drivers in
the refresher category and in the learners category every year. Requisite
vehicles in each category may accordingly be purchased.
v). Teaching and Training Equipments:
a) Working Models of various systems of an Automobile:
- Cooling System
- Transmission System
- Fuel system
- Electrical system
b) Cut Section Models:

Working Models

Rod

Non-Working Models

- Petrol Engine (4 Cylinder)

- Front

- Diesel Engine (6 Cylinder)
- Live Axle Assembly

and Tie rod Assembly
- Gear Box Assembly
- Steering Box Assembly

c) Failed Components:
- Clutch cover Assembly
- Clutch Disc
d) Static Models in Driving Procedures:

axle with

Pull

&

- Axle Shaft
- Crown wheel with pinion
- Starter Motor
- Alternator

With the help of the Vehicle Toys the following driving
procedures may also be displayed :
- MSM & PSL Safety Routines
- IPDE Principle
- Stopping Distance
- Following Distance
- Curve Handling
e) Traffic Sign Boards
f) Overhead Projector
g) Transparency sheets
h) TV & DVD
1) Multimedia Projector
j) Magnetic Board
37

Push

vi). Workshop Equipments:
To carry out day-to-day repairs and maintenance of vehicles, complete set of
tools and other accessories such as air compressor, puncture kit with tyre
lever, wheel brace, jack and tyre pressure gauge, trolley jack, grease gun,
spanners (a set each of fix spanners, box spanners, pliers, screw drivers, screw
spanners and hammer), battery charger, a fully equipped first aid box are
required for workshop for use in emergency.
vii). Testing equipments:
To check the physical abilities of the drivers including vision test, the
following testing equipments are also proposed to provide in the Driver
Training Institute.
Vision drum placed 20 ft/6 m from the person.
Trial set with frame
Ishihara chart (for colour vision testing)

Near vision chart
Weighing machine
Height meter (for measuring height)
viii). Office Equipments:
Xerox Machine,

fax machine,

lamination

machine

& telephone

modem, internet connection and Computers with accessories.

instruments,

ix). Reading Room:
One reading room may also be established for the benefit of the trainees
covering books on traffic rules and regulations, driving procedures, vehicle
maintenance and repairs.
x). Driving Range:
A Driving Range is also proposed to formulate by incorporating different
types of manoeuvres to impart off-road driving practice so as to learn basic
driving procedures and practice driving skills in various situations. The details
of roads proposed to be provided with various manoeuvres in the driving range
and its purpose is as explained below: [vide Annexure — II (B)].
38

Annexure — IT (B)
The Annexure II (B) is recommended to be taken up in phase 2.

Road

Purpose

a) Two Lane Straight
Road

:

Used for freshers to impart Basic Driving Practice
Le. starting — moving — stopping — gear changing —
steering control — passing — overtaking — curve
handling — driving in crawling speed — low speed —
average speed — high speed — following distance —
stopping distance — stopping the vehicle in case of
brake failure, etc. can be practiced.

b) Parking

:

Practice in 3 types of parking manoeuvres 1.e.
parking in parallel, angular and perpendicular to
road. Simulating parking operations in bus stations
and truck parks.

c) Hump Road

:

Parking, stopping and starting operations on sloped
road i.e. to practice clutch balance point and bitting
point and also cautious driving due to reduced sight
distance.

d) 3 Point Turn &
5 Point Turn

:

This is to train the drivers on difficult turning on
restricted roads to take U-Turn.

e) 8-Shaped Bend

:

To train the drivers on left and right steering, sharp
turning and negotiating round about.

f) Reversing box

:

To educate drivers on proper methods of reversing
and turing.

g). Driving Range Aids:
The Driving Range Aids such as erection of road traffic signs and automatic light
signals, road markings, traffic barriers, traffic bollards, lighting and other road
furniture and appurtenance may also be provided in the driving range.
Suggestion for PPP Model

e
e
e

Investment made by PPP Partner will be audited by State Transport Ministry
and approved
The training / testing for Licensing charges will be jointly agreed with State
Governments till the recovery of PPP Partner totally recover their Investment (
Principal Investment, Interest, Recurring Expenses, .. etc )
Post recovery of PPP Partner Investments, recovery can be split 80% / 20% (or)
70% /30%. This should be mutually negotiated & agreed.
39

3.
3.1

SCHEME FOR TIER-III (DTCs)
General Guidelines:

The scheme of setting up of Driving Training Centers (DTCs)
implemented in all Aspirational districts and other rural areas.

shall be

Land for the Driving Training Centre shall be arranged by the Applicant
Agency, which may be acquired on free-hold basis or on long lease for a
period of at least 10 years, with inbuilt provisions for further extension of the
lease period. The cost of the land will not be added in the project cost. The
land should be free from all encumbrances.

(iii)

Priority shall be accorded in the first instance for sanctioning one project per
district. However, more than one project can be considered for approval for
a district with population exceeding 20 lakh if proposals fromother districts
are not forthcoming.

(iv)

Except in the case of OEMs and State Public Undertakings setting up such
facilities, the maximum number of projects submitted by one agency/
consortium shall not be more than five in one State.
The capital component of the proposal may include modern equipment such
as innovative driving test system (IDTS)
using Radio
Frequency
Identification (RFID) tags or video recording, simulators, computers and
other modern aids.
The proposal should also envisage self-sufficiency in meeting the recurring/
operational expenditure as this shall not be provided by the MoRTH.
In case the Agency is availing grant under a National Skill Development
Programme such as Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana, the fee charged
for the training program shall be in sync with the fee structure notified by
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship.
The training courses will be compliant with the National Skill Qualification

Framework (NSQFP).

The above Centres shall submit half-yearly performance reports to MoRTH.
Which shall be responsible for preparation of consolidated performance
report on the subject.
The Centres under the scheme
(SOP)

ie.

Prescribed

must follow Standard Operating

curriculum,

Aadhaar

based

biometric

Procedure

attendance,

qualified instructors, e-payment, real time evaluation, contract with logistics /
aggregators for placement, online evaluation process.

(xi)

latest and future technologies
tutoring,

extensive

interactive

for the purpose of teaching
simulation,

interactive

such as online

screen

and

touch

terminals etc. in place of outdated and obsolete technologies as teaching aids.
40

3.2

(xii)

Proposals received from State Governments/ Private Developers having
encroachment and encumbrance free land in their possession should be given
priority in the setting up of new Driver Training Cenre (DTC).

(xiii)

Annual

audit

mandatory.

to

verify

the

utilisation

of

the

centres

should

be

made

Scope/ Objectives of the scheme:
(i) | To provide financial assistance to private participants for setting-up the Driving
Training Centres.
(ii)

To provide quality training to commercial vehicle drivers to improve road
and environment safety and strengthen overall mobility on roads.

3.3 Eligibility:

(i)

Any entity such as a State Undertaking/ NGO/ Trust/ Cooperative Society/ Vehicle
Manufacturer/ Firm etc. i.e. any legal entity registered under a State or Central
Government Law (hereinafter referred to as ‘Agency’) will be eligible to apply under
the scheme. The other details are as under: (a)

If the applicant agency is an NGO, then it must be registered on DARPAN
Portal of NITI Aayog. While submitting the proposal, the applicant agency
shall quote a system generated Unique ID in their proposal. No member of
the consortium will be the member of another consortium constituted for the
same purpose.

(b)

The agency must show the financial capacity to implement and operate the
project as per the DPR to the satisfaction of the Ministry.
The agency should be able to show/ establish experience or interest in the
initiative.

(c)

The agency can also submit the application as a consortium, however, the number of
members in any such consortium shall not be more than three. The applicant has to
show its financial capacity to manage adequate resources to set up the project as per
the DPR to the satisfaction of the Ministry.
3.4

Infrastructure Requirements:
The infrastructure will be in form of land, building, driving testing tracks, vehicles,
simulators and workshop, etc. About 2 acres of land, owned or leased, would be

required to set-up a Driving Training Centre. The land will not count towards the
Capital Expenditure of the Project. The Centre would be equipped with other
infrastructure facilities, namely:
(i)
(ii)

(iii)

Two class-rooms with teaching aids like computers and Multimedia Projector
for holding theory classes/ lessons on Traffic Rules and Regulations, Driving
Procedures, Vehicle Mechanism, Public Relations and First Aid;
Simulator(s) for both the classes of vehicles (LMV and HMV);

Al

Broadband connectivity including bio-metric attendance system;
Driving track to provide practice to the trainees for manoeuvring,
reverse driving, driving on slopes, etc.
Two LMV/ HMV

vehicles with dual control;

Workshop along with exhibits;
Toilets — separately for Men & Women;
Adequate staff resources in each category
cleaning staff etc.)
Any other, as may be required.
3.5

parking,

(Teaching

staff,

IT

personnel,

Financial assistance:
One-t ime assistance to the extent of 50% of the project cost, subject to amaximum of

Rs 1.00 crore (all inclusive), shall be admissible for setting up the Driving Training
Centre. The operational expenses (OPEX) of the Centre shall be met by the Centre
through its internal accruals or funding from non-governmental sources.
Financial assistance under the Scheme shall be released in the following manner:
S.N.| Instalment
Condition
(i) | Ist Instalment as | Against BG for the amount
‘On
account’
payment
(ii) | 2°4 Instalment

(iv) | 3" Instalment

Total
Expenditure

Advance

On submission of UC of 40%

of | 50%

of the eligible

the Project Cost — duly certified | grant amount
by a Chartered Accountant
On
submission
of UC
of | 10% of the eligible
completed project (100%) and | grant amount
commencement of operations of
the Centre.
100%
Transfer

(EAT)

module

expenditures on the project under the scheme.

3.6

Amount
40% of the eligible
grant amount

of

PFMS

shall

be

used

for

Procedure for seeking assistance:

(i)

The agency desirous of setting up the Driving Training Centre shall prepare the
DPR and submit the application in the format provided in Annexure III (A)
along with a copy of the DPR. The DPR should be vetted by the National Skill
Development Council (NSDC) or any other Sector Skill Council in respect of
the infrastructure provisions and also a financial Institution, if the project is
proposed to be funded through any institutional loan;
The proposal for setting up of DTCs shall be considered on the basis of
recommendation of the concerned District Collector. The Agency shall submit
the proposal, alongwith duty vetted DPR by NSDC or any other Sector Skill
Council as per provisions in para 3.6(i), to the concerned District Collector.
42

The District Collector shall forward the proposal with his recommendation
alongwith an undertaking duly signed by the designated authority of the State
Government to accredit the Centre and exempt the successful trainees from the
requirement of further testing for grant of licence as per Annexure III (B). The
proposal shall be forwarded to the PMU established in the Ministry of Road
Transport & Highways for the purpose.

3.7

(iii)

The proposal received from the agency shall be scrutinized by the PMU.

(iv)

A committee of MoRTH comprising of Director/Deputy Secretary (Road
safety), Dy. Financial Advisor, representative of ASRTU and SE (Road safety)
shall review the proposals on a monthly basis. The appraised proposals shall be
processed for release of grant, preferably within a month’s time.

Time-lines for Receipt of Applications and Completion of the Projects:
(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

3.8

PMU

|The Scheme

shall remain in operation till 31.03.2026.

As such, it shall not be

feasible to release any financial assistance after 31.03.2026 under this Scheme.
The successful applicant will be required to complete the project and
operationalize the same before 31.12.2025 in order to avail of the full eligible
grant amount.
Applications may be submitted on an on-going basis, which shall be considered
and decided on a quarterly basis.
Given the project implementation period of about one year, the last date of
receipt of complete applications under the Scheme shall be 30" November
2024.
for the Scheme:

The Scheme shall be administered through a PMU to be set-up in MoRTH, for which
resources may be hired/ taken on deputation from agencies such as ASTRU, CIRT
or any other source, with the caveat that the total expenditure on the PMU shall be
managed within 3% of the amount earmarked for the Scheme.
PMU/ MoRTH shall examine the applications and determine the eligibility of
proposals within fifteen days of its receipt. The eligible proposals shall be sanctioned
and conveyed to the applicant. The applicant will be required to obtain Bank
Guarantee (valid for a period of one year) equal tothe amount of first instalment and
the first instalment of on account advance shall be released within a period of 7
working days from the date of submission of BG.
3.9

Operations and management of the Centre

3.9.1

The Agency proposing to set up the Driving Training Centre will have to sign a tripartite MoU with the State Transport Department and the MoRTH before the release

of ‘on account’

advance.

The

MoU

will include

commitment

from the

State

government to recognise the centre as an accredited establishment for the purposes
of exemption from driving licence testing for granting non-transport licence. The
centre will require regular expenditure to carry its operations (OPEX) to manage its
43

day-to- day operations and to provide for the manpower. The Centre will be run as
an on-going concern without any financial support for its operations by MoRTH.
However, there is no bar from seeking support under CSR from Corporate sector or
under any other scheme of the Central or State Government. The Agency may
charge appropriate fees for the training program.
3.9.2

The Centre will engage the services of qualified instructors to impart driving
training. The curriculum and evaluation matrix for the trainees will be accordance
with the SOP provided by the National Skill Development Council or any of the
Sector Skill councils. The Centre will also have to sign a MoU with NSDC or any
other Sector Skill Council engaged in driving training, before commencing its
operations.

3.10

Allied activities:

Subject to availability of land and required infrastructure, the agency may also use
the facility for provision of other allied activities, such as, establishment of
Automated Vehicle Testing Centre, ‘Pollution Under Check’ facility at the same
premises in order to improve the financial viability of the project, at his own cost so
long as these facilities do not in any manner compromise with the mainobjective of
the Scheme. However, establishment of any such additional facilities will not form a
part of the Central assistance under the Scheme.

44

Annexure - ITI (A)

Form

for seeking

financial

assistance

for setting up of a Driving

Sr.
N
1

Name of the Applicant

2

Legal Status

3.
4
5

Date of registration / incorporation

6
7

Bank Account No. and IFSC Code of the Bank

8.

9.

Subject

Particulars

Contact Number, Email id
Postal Address
Name, Address and Aadhar Number of

the Principal Officer
Whether applying individually or in consortium. If in consortium,
please indicate the details of member of the consortium. Copy of
MOU signed between/ amongst Consortium members be enclosed.
In case of NGO, please furnish-

1.
2.

TrainingCentre

Date of registration on DARPANPortal
Unique ID generated on DARPAN Portal

10. | Location of Project
11. | Area of land on which project is proposed to be set-up
12. | Whether the land is free-hold/ lease-hold Please attach the supporting
document like purchase deed/ lease agreement
13. | Whether
land
is
free
from
encumbrances?
14. | Total estimated cost of the
Project
(Enclose copy of DPR)
15. | Means of financing Enclose proof with regard to sources offunds and availability.
(Copies of last three years balance sheets, if available)
16. | Indicate the total financial support requested from the
Government. (Notexceeding 50% of the total cost excluding land)
17. | Time period for completion of the Project
18. | Please describe as to how the Centre will
have competence to impart training to MHV and LMV drivers

45

Sr.
Subject
No.
19. | Whether the DPR includes provisions for:
(i)

Two Classrooms,

(ii)

Office space,

Particulars

(ili) HMV
and
LMV_
Simulators,Demonstration items for
workshop,
iv) Vehicles (both HMV and LMV)
Som

v) Driving tracks — automated/ non-automated,
vi) Bio-matric attendance system,
vii) Plan of operation, etc.

20. | Whether the proposal has been endorsed by the District Collector and
recommended by the State Transport Commissioner ?
21. | Whether the Agency is willing to sign an MoU with a Sector Skill
Council for running NSQF compliant training program?
22. | Whether the project has been appraisedby the
Financial Institution (Attach report) ?

NSDC

and/or

a

23. | Attach an undertaking to the effect that the Centre will be used for the
purposesof imparting driving training for a period of at least ten years, else
the grant would be liable to be recovered as arrears of land revenue.

(Signature of the Authorized signatory)
[Name and Designation of the Authorized Signatory]
Date:

Place:

46

Annexure —ITI (B)

State Government of -----------------Department of -------------------------------------

Authorisation of the Driving Training Centre

M/s
Drivingtraining Centre at

has submitted
, District-

cost of ---------------- .

The proposal seeks financial assistance of Rs.
RoadTransport and Highways.
The Centre,

on completion

in accordance

a

proposal
at

for setting-up a
a total project

from the Ministry of

with the DPR,

will be authorised/

accredited to impart training to the driving licence aspirants and no further
testing would be required for grant of “non-transport” licence to the successful
trainees, subject to fulfillment of provisions under the Central Motor Vehicles
Rules, 1989 for accredited driving training centres.

(Signature of the designated authority)
[Name and Designation of the designated authority]

47

